Extent
The International Hydrographic Organization defines the limits of the Bay of Bengal as follows:[3]

On the east: A line running from Cape Negrais (16°03'N) in Burma through the larger islands of the Andaman group, in such a way that all the narrow waters between the islands lie Eastward of the line and are excluded from the Bay of Bengal, as far as a point in Little Andaman Island in latitude 10°48'N, longitude 92°24'E and thence along the Southwest limit of the Burma Sea [A line running from "Oedjong Raja" ["Ujung Raja" or "Point Raja"] (5°32′N 95°12′E) in Sumatra to Poeloe Bras (Breuëh) and on through the Western Islands of the Nicobar Group to Sandy Point in Little Andaman Island, in such a way that all the narrow waters appertain to the Burma Sea].
On the south: Adam's Bridge (between India and Ceylon) and from the Southern extreme of Dondra Head (South point of Ceylon) to the North point of Poeloe Bras (5°44′N 95°04′E).
Note: Oedjong means "cape" in Dutch language on maps of the Netherlands East Indies (Indonesia).[4]

Etymology
The bay gets its name from the historical Bengal region (modern-day Bangladesh and the Indian states of West Bengal, Tripura and the Barak valley of Southern Assam). In Ancient Indian scriptures, this water body may have been referred to as Mahodadhi (Sanskrit: महोदधि, lit. 'Great water receptacle').[5][6][better source needed] Ancient Romans called it Sinus Gangeticus or Gangeticus Sinus whilst Ancient Greeks called it in Ancient Greek: Κόλπος Γαγγητικός, meaning "Gulf of the Ganges",[7][8] and old European maps continued to use this name.[9]

The other Sanskrit names for Bay of Bengal are Vaṅgopasāgara (Sanskrit: वङ्गोपसागर, lit. 'Bengal Sub-sea or Bengal Bay'), Vaṅgasāgara (Sanskrit: वङ्गसागर, lit. 'Bengal Sea'), Pūrvapayodhi (Sanskrit: पूर्वपयोधि, lit. 'Eastern Ocean').[citation needed]

History

Ross Island, in the Andamans, was one of the main naval bases of India during World War II
In ancient Classical India, the Bay of Bengal was most commonly known as Kalinga Sagar (Kalinga Sea).[10][11] Another name commonly used mainly in Tamil was Vanga Kadal.

Northern Circars occupied the western coast of the Bay of Bengal and is now considered to be India's Odisha and Andhra Pradesh state. Chola dynasty (9th century to 12th century) when ruled by Rajaraja Chola I and Rajendra Chola I occupied and controlled the Bay of Bengal with Chola Navy circa AD 1014, the Bay of Bengal was also called the Chola Sea or Chola Lake.[10]

The Kakatiya dynasty reached the western coastline of the Bay of Bengal between the Godavari and the Krishna rivers. Kushanas about the middle of the 1st century AD invaded northern India perhaps extending as far as the Bay of Bengal. Chandragupta Maurya extended the Maurya Dynasty across northern India to the Bay of Bengal. Hajipur was a stronghold for Portuguese Pirates. In the 16th century, the Portuguese built trading posts in the north of the Bay of Bengal at Chittagong (Porto Grande) and Satgaon (Porto Pequeno).[12]

The earliest sign of Muslims in the region came from the textile trade routes where one targeted the east Arabian Sea influencing migration of Arabs and Persians and another to the west causing Buddhist Bengalis to culturally mix with Islam.[13]

Historic sites

The Shore Temple, a UNESCO World Heritage Site on the shore of the Bay of Bengal.
In alphabetical order:

Antarvedi is a popular place of worship Southern India, in Konaseema district of Andhra Pradesh devoted to Sri Lakshmi Narasimha Swamy Temple. This is the place where one of the distributaries of Godavari River meets the Bay of Bengal.[14]
Arikamedu is an archaeological site in Southern India, in Kakkayanthope, Ariyankuppam Commune, Puducherry. It is 4 kilometres (2.5 mi) from the capital, Pondicherry of the Indian territory of Puducherry
British penal colony: Cellular Jail or "Black Waters" built in 1896 on Ross Island, a part of the Andaman Island Chain. As early as 1858, this island was used as a British penal colony for political prisoners facing life imprisonment.[15][better source needed]
Buddhist heritage sites of Pavurallakonda, Thotlakonda and Bavikonda lie along the coast of Bay of Bengal at Visakhapatnam in India.
Konark is the home of the Sun Temple or Black Pagoda. This Brahman sanctuary was built of black granite mid-1200 AD and has been declared a World Heritage Site.
Jagannath Temple at Puri is one of the four sacred places in Hindu pilgrimage along with Puri beach on the banks of Bay of Bengal. Mahodadhi was named after Lord Jagannath.
Ramanathaswamy Temple is at Dhanushkodi, where the Bay of Bengal and the Gulf of Mannar come together.[16]
Seven Pagodas of Mahabalipuram is the name for Mahabalipuram. Mahabalipuram's Shore Temple, a World Heritage Site was constructed in the 8th century AD and myth has it that six other temples were built here.
Sri Vaisakheswara Swamy temple lies two kilometers from the Visakhapatnam coast under the Bay of Bengal's sea bed. Spokespeople from Andhra University Centre for Marine Archaeology say the temple may be opposite the Coastal Battery.[17]
Vivekanandar Illam was constructed in 1842 by the American "Ice King" Frederic Tudor to store and market ice year round. In 1897, Swami Vivekananda's famous lectures were recorded here at Castle Kernan. The site is an exhibition devoted to Swami Vivekananda and his legacy.[citation needed]
Marine archaeology
Maritime archaeology or marine archaeology is the study of how ancient peoples interacted with the sea and waterways. A specialized branch, archaeology of shipwrecks, studies the salvaged artifacts of ancient ships. Stone anchors, amphorae shards, elephant tusks, hippopotamus teeth, ceramic pottery, a rare wood mast and lead ingots are examples which may survive submerged for centuries for archaeologists to discover, study, and place their salvaged findings into the timeline of history. Coral reefs, tsunamis, cyclones, mangrove swamps, battles, and a criss-cross of sea routes in a high trading area combined with piracy have all contributed to shipwrecks in the Bay of Bengal.[18]

Shipwrecks and important shipping incidences
In chronological order:

1778 to 1783: The Naval operations in the American Revolutionary War or American War of Independence ranged as far as the Bay of Bengal.
c. 1816: Mornington ship burned in the Bay of Bengal.[19]
1850: American clipper brig Eagle is supposed to have sunk in the Bay of Bengal.[20]
American Baptist missionary Adoniram Judson died 12 April 1850 and was buried at sea in the Bay of Bengal.
1855: The Bark "Incredible" struck on a sunken rock in the Bay of Bengal.[21]
1865: a gale dismasted the Euterpe while traversing the Bay of Bengal typhoon.
1875: Veleda - 76 m (250 ft) long and 15 m (50 ft) wide. It is part of a current salvage operation.[22]
1914: September 10 - SS Indus: A steamship that was captured and scuttled by SMS Emden.
1942: Japanese cruiser Yura of the Second Expeditionary Fleet, Malay Force, attacked merchant ships in the Bay of Bengal.
April 7 - SS Selma City: Attacked by Japanese bombers in the Bay of Bengal, about 25 miles (40 km) offshore from Vizagapatam, India.
April 9 - HMS Hermes: The world's first purpose-built aircraft carrier, which sunk after receiving 40 direct hits from 70 Mitsubishi A6M Zero fighter/bombers off the coast of Sri Lanka.
1971: December 3 – Pakistan Navy submarine PNS Ghazi sunk under mysterious circumstances, near Visakhapatnam, in the Bay of Bengal.
